---
layout: post
title:  "Macrocytic and Microcytic Anemia"
date:   2014-02-11 8:00:00
categories: hematology
---

### Overview
- Anemia can be classified in many ways, but one common way is based on mean red cell volume (MCV): **microcytic**: MCV < 80, normocytic MCV 80-100, **macrocytic** MCV > 100.
- **Causes of microcytic anemia**: iron deficiency, thalassemia, sideroblastic anemia, anemia of inflammation, lead toxicity.
- **Causes of macrocytic anemia**: Longer list! First dichotomy is between *megaloblastic* (B<sub>12</sub> or folate deficiency, some medications) and *non-megaloblastic* (secondary to elevated reticulocyte count, liver disease, ETOH, hypothyroidism, myelodysplasia, some medications)

<span><br></span>
### Iron metabolism
- Meat-derived iron is more available for absorption than plant-derived; however, we only need 1-2mg iron daily to maintain homeostasis and typical diets in developed country have 15-20mg iron per day ingested. There is increased iron demand in pregnancy (5-6 mg/day)
- **Key point:** *Iron absorption, transport, storage, and release is tightly regulated* because iron is **toxic** and **cannot be excreted**. Iron's deleterious effects related to ability to generate oxygen free radical species. Because iron can't be actively excreted, iron balance is maintained by **limiting uptake in the intestine** and continuously recycling cellular iron.
- The proteins involved: **Ferritin**: main source of stored iron. **Transferrin**: plasma carrier, transports iron to tissues with transferrin receptors. **Hemosiderin**: insoluble protein/iron complex derived from digested ferritin molecules, found in macrophages. **Hepcidin**: 25AA liver polypeptide, the major hormonal regulator of iron homeostasis. **Ferroportin**: transmembrane iron exporter, expressed on duodenal enterocytes and macrophages.
- Multiple safety mechanisms contribute to homeostasis: chaperone proteins (transferrin, haptoglobin), storage by ferritin, export out of enterocyte by ferroportin.
- Iron is taken up through the endosomal cycle of **transferring receptor TFR1** (all cells), **DMT1** on enterocytes, or via RBC breakdown (macrophage-mediated senescent erythrophagocytosis). Within the cell, the labile iron pool accommodates metabolic demand, most going to the mitochondria to be incorporated into heme iron-sulfur clusters. Excess iron is stored by ferritin to be secreted back into circulation or exported back to transferrin via ferroportin. **Cellular homeostasis** maintained by iron regulatory proteins (*IRPs*), which are influenced by iron deficiency and hypoxia, **systemic homeostasis** maintained by *hepcidin* by degrading ferroportin, thus restricting iron delivery to plasma carrier transferrin. 	
- Mechanisms of duodenal absorption of heme and non-heme iron: **Non-heme iron (Fe<sup>3+</sup>)** is converted to Fe<sup>2+</sup> by Dcytb before being imported to the cell by DMT1. **Heme-incorporated iron** is internalized by a different enzyme (HCP1) and the iron is excised by heme oxygenase (Hox1) before being moved to storage by ferritin or transported into circulation by ferroportin to transferrin. The amount of iron absorbed is regulated by controlling degradation of DMT1 and ferroportin.
- **Hepcidin**: The major hormonal regulator of iron homeostasis. Increased hepcidin expression in the setting of increased iron stores and inflammatory cytokines. Decreased hepcidin expression in the setting of increased erythropoietic activity. Major function of hepcidin is to cause the internalization and degradation of ferroportin, which causes decreased iron availability due to decreased iron release from enterocytes, macrophages, and hepatocytes. Hepcidin is the reason behind "anemia of chronic inflammation," where patients that are sick with cancer or infection are found to be anemic despite having normal iron/ferritin levels
- **Iron overload**: hepcidin is upregulated, causing degradation of ferroportin, sequestering the iron as ferritin in enterocytes, hepatocyte, and macrophages. Serum transferrin will also be fully occupied.
- **Hereditary hemochromatosis**: abnormal iron absorption (about 5-6 mg/day) leading to iron overload and resultant tissue damage. More about this coming during the GI module.
- **Lab evaluation of iron status**: Lab measurement of serum ferritin, total iron binding capacity (**T**IBC, surrogate for **t**ransferrin), serum iron (measure of iron bound to transferrin), or soluble transferrin receptor. 

<span><br></span>

### Microcytic anemias
- Small erythrocytes due to **decreased heme production** (due to reduced amount of available iron or abnormal deposition of iron) or **decreased globin production** (such as in thalassemic syndromes)
- **Iron deficiency**: hepcidin is downregulated, activating ferroportin to transport to transferrin and get what available iron there to the tissues. Causes of iron deficiency: poor diet, increased need (infancy, menses, pregnancy), poor absorption (gastrectomy, IBD, sprue, achlorhydria, acute or chronic blood loss, intravascular hemolysis with filtering). Assume chronic blood loss until proven otherwise, and the most common source will be GI! **Labs show**: TIBC is high, but serum iron is low, ferritin is low, and soluble transferrin receptor is high. Low reticulocyte count because not enough iron to drive erythropoiesis. A peripheral smear will show microcytic, hypochromic erythrocytes with strong central pallor. **Treatment**: Number one priority is to identify the cause. Iron can be replaced PO or IV route, can take up to 6 months to replace stores via PO route but with GI side effects.
- **Anemia of inflammation**: Raised hepcidin levels secondary to response from pro-inflammatory cytokines (**IL-1, IL-6, and TNF**) leads to a blockage of iron absorption, iron recycling, decreased iron release from macrophages and decreased erythropoiesis. This is thought to be a protective mechanism against pathogens: bacteria, tumor cells, and synovial cells all need iron for metabolism; sequestering the iron is an attempt to slow down the pathology! **Labs show**: low serum iron, low transferrin, low soluble transferrin receptor, low saturation, BUT ferritin is high. **Causes:** chronic infectious diseases, connective tissue diseases (RA, SLE, vasculitis), inflammatory bowel disease, sarcoidosis, malignancy.

<span><br></span>

### Macrocytic anemias
- **Megaloblastic anemias**: very large red cell precursors (erythroblasts) in the bone marrow show characteristic abnormality where nucleus maturation is delayed relative to that of the cytoplasm due to defective DNA synthesis. Usually caused by **B<sub>12</sub> or folate** deficiency.
- **B<sub>12</sub> deficiency**: B<sub>12</sub> is released from food when combined with **intrinsic factor**, which is synthesized by gastric parietal cells. The IF/B<sub>12</sub> complex then binds to receptors specific for the distal ileum. Once in the portal system, B<sub>12</sub> binds to **transcobalamin**, which delivers the molecule to the bone marrow and other tissues. Review from biochemistry: B<sub>12</sub> is a coenzyme used for methionine synthesis (and thus S-adenosyl methionine synthesis) and fatty acid breakdown; SAM used for DNA and myelin methylation, B<sub>12</sub> necessary to convert methyl-THF to THF, which is needed to convert dUMP to dTMP. **Causes**: diet (strict vegans), Consider iatrogenic B<sub>12</sub> deficiencies following either gastrectomies or ileoectomy. Malabsorption syndrome can also be causative, and due to celiac disease, inflammatory bowel disease, bacterial overgrowth, or fish tapeworm *Diphyllobothrium latum*. May also be due to pernicious anemia, see below. **Labs show**: Elevated MCV, target cells, **macroovalocytes** low reticulocyte count, low B<sub>12</sub>, elevated homocysteine, methylmalonic acidosis, hypersegmented PMNs, WBCs and platelets reduced, megaloblasts in the bone marrow, elevated bilirubin and LDH. **Physical exam findings**: progressive sensory neuropathy of the posterior and lateral column, distal extremity parasthesias, disequilibrium, "vibrations," and spasticity; if unchecked will lead to dementia, psychiatric manifestations, or optic atrophy. **Treatment**: B12 can be replenished via IV or IM routes, give every 4 to 8 weeks via IM route.
- **Pernicious anemia**: an autoimmune disorder affecting the gastric mucosa, leading to atrophy; results in *achlorhydria*, the lack of gastric acidity and subsequent lack of intrinsic factor secretion and poorer reduction of Fe<sup>3+</sup> to Fe<sup>2+</sup>. 90% show antibodies to parietal cells or intrinsic factor, often presents with other autoimmune disorders. Increased risk for gastric cancers, so increase surveillance with periodic endoscopies.
- **Folate deficiency**: **Cause**: malnutrition (chronic alcoholics), malabsorption (sprue, Crohn's, small bowel resection), excess utilization (pregnancy - always supplement with folate!, hemolysis, inflammatory state), liver disease, some medications (phenytoin, Bactrim, methotrexate, sulfasalazine). **Labs show**: elevated MCV, target cells, **macroovalocytes**, low reticulocyte count elevated homocysteine with normal methylmalonic acid level, hypersegmented PMNs, WBCs and platelets reduced, megaloblasts in the bone marrow, elevated bilirubin and LDH. **Treatment**: oral folate easily absorbed, but there is poor folate storage so prescribe as daily medication. 
- **Non-megaloblastic macrocytic anemias**: *"macrocytic anemia in which DNA synthesis is unimpaired."* **Causes:** hemolysis, leads to elevated reticulocyte count (reticulocytes are larger than mature RBCs, thus MCV and RDW increases); alcoholism, leads to increased cholesterol in RBC membrane, hypothyroidism, liver disease, pregnancy, myelodysplastic syndromes, congenital deficiencies in purine or pyrimidine synthesis, some medications (5-FU, AZT, hydroxyurea).

<span><br></span>

### Media to add
- **Insert picture: normal iron metabolism!**
- **Insert picture: peripheral smear of iron deficiency**
- **Insert picture: anemia of inflammation schematic**
- **Insert picture**: megaloblastic vs. normoblastic, slide 30