---
layout: post
title:  "Structure of Cartilage"
date:   2014-05-13 8:20:00
categories: musculoskeletal
---

### Cartilage Overview
- A specialized form of dense connective tissue, thus has two major components: a population of cells (chondroblasts and chondrocytes) and extracellular matrix
- Similarities to bone: strength, functions in supportive, and close connections. 
- Differences to bone: extracellular matrix of cartilage is non-calcified and avascular. This means that cells in cartilage get their oxygen and nutrients through diffusion.
- Different roles at different times of life: template for temporary skeleton of embryo, growth plates in the long bones and base of skull, articular joint surfaces, and support and shape of the trachea, bronchi, larynx, epiglottis, intervertebral discs, menisci, and costal cartilage.
- Role in fracture repair: component of the callus, see notes from bone pathology and fracture lecture for more details.

<span><br></span>

### Cartilage Types
- **Hyaline cartilage**: Most common and abundant. Chondrocytes arranged as either single cells or small, nested groups. They are surrounded by a lot of extracellular matrix, called ground substance which is rich in proteoglycans and type II collagen fibers which give it compressible properties. Grows by **appositional growth**, which means adding new chondroblasts to its outer surface, but the chondrocytes can also mitotically divide in the lacunar space, called **isogenous division**, which the cartilage grows from the interior and is called **interstitial growth**. Hyaline cartilage can be stained with toluidine blue, darker spots represent higher GAG concentration, light spots represent higher collagen concentration.  Examples: found in the developing embryo, articular ends of bones, costal cartilage and cartilage found in respiratory tract. Perichondrium is present, except in articular cartilages and thus that subtype cannot grow by appositional growth but can by interstitial growth.
- **Elastic cartilage**: Chondrocytes also as single cells or small, nested groups. Large amount of ground substance which is also rich in hydrated proteoglycans and type II collagen, but there are also a lot of elastic fibers, which give this type of cartilage its elastic properties. Examples: epiglottis, pinna. Elastic cartilage typically covered with a perichondrium, so they can grow via appositional and interstitial growth. Special stain for elastic fibers shows black rings in the territorial region around the chondrocytes. Note for ear infections after piercing: inflammation can only happen in vascularized tissues, so it's really a perichondritis!
- **Fibro-cartilage**: Relatively fewer cells, chondrocytes arranged in short lines of 2-4 cells surrounded by relatively less blue-staining ground substance. Ground substance here contains **type 1 collagen**, which contributes to the lines of dense connective tissue that separates the rows of chondrocytes. This type of cartilage is not very compressible or elastic, but is very strong and load-bearing. Perichondrium is absent. Examples: intervertebral disc (and Sharpey's fibers), pubic symphysis, meniscus, TMJ, ligament insertions to bone (called "enthesis"). 
- **Perichondrium**: germinative layer for cartilage growth. Two layers, top layer containing blood vessels, inner layer containing mesenchymal stem cells which can differentiate into the chondrogenic pathway if given the correct growth factor milieu.

<span><br></span>

### Cartilage Composition
- **Cells**: Cells in cartilage are named according to their degree of development and differentiation. Earliest is **chondrogenic precursor cells**, which develop into **chondroblasts**, which evolve into the most mature type of cell called the **chondrocyte** after becoming fully engulfed in secreted matrix. Chondrocytes all sit in their own niche called a **lacunar space**. Both chondroblasts and chondrocytes are capable of secreting the components of the extracellular matrix. Chondrocytes all originate from **mesenchymal** stem cells, which are pluripotential cells with a stellate form (other identifying features: pointy cytoplasmic projections, central nuclei with well dispersed chromatin), and can give rise to fibroblasts. Fibroblasts are spindle shaped, elongated, oval nuclei with prominent nucleoli and depending on the growth factors they receive can differentiate into chondroblasts or osteoblasts.  
- **Matrix**: Essential components of the matrix are **proteoglycans**, **glycosaminoglycans**, and **glycoproteins**. Fibers are also evident, including type II and type I collagen as well as elastic fibers, depending on the type of cartilage in question.
- **Proteoglycans**: made up of various glycosaminoglycans attached to straight or branched chains of polysaccharides, which are attached to a central core protein. Proteoglycan monomers get attached using link proteins to a very long hyaluronic acid backbone, forming very large "**aggrecans**" molecules. Because the glycosaminoglycan side chains are all negatively charged, they collectively repel each other, and hold this large molecule in an open position and attract cations like sodium and water, forming a well hydrated gel. This molecular structures explains both properties of compressibility of cartilage and how nutrients and oxygen can diffuse into cartilage; it's because it's so well hydrated.