---
layout: post
title:  "Pathology of the Esophagus and Stomach"
date:   2014-02-25 9:00:00
categories: gastro
---

### Pathology of the Esophagus
- **Zenker's Diverticulum**: Location: upper esophagus, posterior wall, involvement of all layers. Thought to be a developmental defect of the cricopharyngeal muscles, which over time leads to a pulsion diverticulum due to pressure. More common in men over 60. Presents with food regurgitation. Diagnose with endoscopy and barium swallow study. Surgery to correct.
- **Schatzki's Ring**: Location: lower esophagus, near the squamo-columnar junction. Formation of a "shelf" due to redundant mucosa, submucosa, and smooth muscle. Lots of asymptomatic Schatzki's rings out there, but typically presents with dysphagia or odynophagia. Treat with surgical dilation.
- **Esophagitis**: Classifiable into infectious (i.e. candida), reflux, or eosinophilic.
- **Candida esophagitis**: Risk factors: immunosuppressed patients, diabetics, or with antibiotics. Presents with dysphagia and burning pain. Location: lower esophagus. Endoscopy with cytology or biopsy, evidence of pseudomembranous exudate suggestive of acute process. Use silver stain to detect *Candida albicans*. Candida may become invasive, poor outcomes.
- **Gastro-esophageal reflux disease (GERD)**: Often associated with particular foods. Can be caused by "chemical" means due to relaxation of the lower esophageal sphincter (such as alcohol, smoking, or medications), or "physical" causes due to pregnancy, obesity, or a large meal. Typically presents as heartburn that is worse after eating due to increased acid secretion. GERD pathology triad is squamous hyperplasia, vascular dilatation, and prominent eosinophilia. Complications include aspiration pneumonia, esophagitis, and Barrett's esophagus. Treatment: pharmacological or perhaps magnetic sphincter!
- **Barrett's Esophagus**: 10% of people with chronic GERD. Increased risk for esophageal carcinoma.  Diagnosis with endoscopy and biopsy, basic lesion is metaplasia though late stage will see some dysplastic cells as well. "Esophageal squamous cells look like the intestine!" Endoscopy with mucosa that looks roughened, granular, somewhat erythematous. **Villin** expression appears. Spectrum towards cancer involves villin appearance while still metaplastic, increasing microvascularity, and finally expression of *CARF* along with a chromosome 4 deletion.
- **Eosinophilic esophagitis**: unknown etiology, mostly affecting children, thought to be an allergic process. Location is throughout the esophagus and patchy. Presents with dysphagia and burning sensation. Increasing incidence probably due to increasing allergy phenomenon nowadays. Biopsy shows intraepithelial eosinophils.
- **Esophageal carcinoma**: Most common in: age over 50, male, northern Chinese. Fastest growing incidence of all cancers, now 17,000 new cases annually. Risk factors: smoking, alcohol, chronic GERD with Barrett's esophagus, nitrosamines and nitrates in diet. Location: 50% of adenocarcinomas are in the lower third, but 40% of squamous carcinomas in upper and middle thirds. Gross growth patterns: polypoid or fungating >> ulcerating > diffusely infiltrating flat lesions. Symptoms are typically insidious and include dysphagia, reflux, weight loss, and GI bleeding. Associated with *CARF* gene deletion on chromosome 4. 5% 5-year survival, 75% die within one year. New treatments for early esophageal carcinoma include endoscopic mucosal 'thin' resection, RF ablation, or photodynamic therapy.

<span><br></span>
### Pathology of the Stomach
- **Pyloric stenosis**: caused by pyloric muscle hypertrophy. Occurs in infants, more likely in boys, onset 2-3 weeks postnatally with projectile vomiting, alkalosis, dehydration, and weight loss. Pyloromyotomy or Ramstedt procedure is curative. Hypertrophy begins after birth, reason unknown.
- **Stress ulcer disease**: Different than peptic ulcer disease, lots of smaller lesions. Due to imbalance between mucosal defense and damage. Blood flow is very important, and thus **hypotension** is a common cause of stress ulcers in ICU players. May also occur with NSAID or steroids due to decreased prostaglandin synthesis. Patients will often develop GI bleeding due to the stress ulcers.
- **Gastrointestinal Stromal Tumors (GIST)**: Commonly diagnosed in patients 40-60, most common location is in the stomach. They are mesenchymal tumors of the wall, and look like leiomyomas, but are derived from the interstitial cells of Cajal. They have a "spindle cell" tumor appearance pathologically, and an association with mutations in **c-KIT** on 14q have been established. 90% of GISTs are benign, malignant criteria include size greater than 2cm, increased number of mitoses, and deletions in c-KIT gene. Treatment: surgical excision and tyrosine kinase inhibitors.
- **Gastric cancer**: Most common in ages 55-75 in Asians and Russian males. Incidence declining, accounts for 3% of cancer deaths. Risk factors: genetics, dietary (smoked foods, nitrates, salt), tobacco abuse, EBV for lymphoepithelial type, and *H. pylori* chronic gastritis. Most lesions occur in the pylorus and antrum, size must be greater than 2cm. Diagosis depends on endoscopy and biopsy, but three major types: ulcerating, polypoid/fungating, or diffusely infiltrating (linitis plastica). Adenocarcinoma can be with gland formation or worse, with "signet ring" structure. Treatment with gastrectomy, radiation, and chemotherapy are often not effective. Worse prognosis with *HER2* amplication. Use gastric pepsinogen to screen for early disease, it would be decreased both in serum and gastric juice.